## IS 340: Open-Source Final Paper
Michael Matz, Fall 2023

### Abstract
In the following paper, I want to outline the characteristics of my open-source community. In this paper, I will be discussing the obstacles faced by college students when finding opportunities regarding their lives after graduation. I will also discuss the goal of the community, the events it will plan, and the general principles it will make use of. To demonstrate the knowledge, I have gained from Dr. Bradly Alicea's lectures during my time in IS 340: Project Management I will be building a platform centered around how to support a community of students, by using hypothetical circumstances in my article, and provide prospective examples that may support or help my open-source community and ideally solve at least one of many obstacles they face.

### Introduction
This Open-Source project gives students like me to choose a demographic or community an opportunity to provide value and solutions that their community may face at any point in their life. Currently, I am a senior at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, and as I look around at my peers, I ask myself the question, “Why are we here?”. The short answer to that question is to move on. Move on to where you may ask. Well, there are plenty of avenues and routes people may take after receiving their college degree. Some options are joining a corporate company and moving up the ranks, another option is to go back to school and pursue a Master’s degree or Doctorate in a topic of choice that you want to become an expert in. My point is that the opportunities are endless when it comes down to what can be accomplished after college. Well as I examine many fellow seniors, I compare my college experience to theirs. When I was a freshman at the University of Illinois, I knew my path. Freshman year is meant to network and meet people, sophomore you begin looking for the top internship, junior year you land that internship and study abroad in the country of your choice, and then senior year you land a return offer and are essentially coasting until graduation. Sounds like a sound plan, right? Well, as I reflect on my own college experience there is no room left for spontaneous opportunities. No room or time to try something else and experiment. Another problem with this plan that I found is that if you weren’t aware of this path as a freshman, you are late to the game and there is no room for entry after the train has passed. That is exactly what I saw in friends and other classmates as a senior. They weren’t aware of this path and by definition are “late to the game”. University’s jobs are meant to advance their students’ lives in every space of their lives. However, if a student is unaware of this path, what are they making of their college career? 



### Purpose
The purpose of this project is to help students who are in the senior and junior grades land meaningful, prestigious, and exciting work, as opposed to getting whatever job they can get an offer from, setting them up on a career path they may not want in the long run. On the other hand, if a student doesn’t see a career in the corporate world for themselves, then a proper introduction to what master's and Ph.D. programs are best for whichever field they have an interest in becoming an expert in. The meaning behind this is to help universities find new unique ways to help students achieve what they want out of college. I see many students putting in the work on their own merit and their own motivation which is great and very inspiring. However, they must have been aware of these opportunities for career advancements and knew exactly when and where the work had to be put in. On the contrary, many students are not aware that their dream job exists, how vital it is to network with others, and the importance of a strong resume that highlights your education, interpersonal skills, and involvement on campus. In the paper, Key Determinants of Students’ Satisfaction, written by Kevin M. Elliot, it is examined and studied what makes a student’s experience at a given university enjoyable and fulfilling. They used multiple data analytics and science techniques to determine students’ satisfaction with the university’s offerings and found that. “The results of this study suggest the key determinants of student satisfaction include a) students’ feeling of belonging; and b) providing a quality education. Students want to feel as though they are important to the university. Moreover, students need to experience intellectual growth in their college life and interact with faculty who are fair/unbiased and can provide quality instruction. The results also show that university staff need to demonstrate a sincere concern for students through caring and helpful attitudes and policies. Showing concern for students, as it relates to their academic success or their problems, should be a priority for a university. Students want to feel like they are the center of attention” (Elliott). This quote emphasizes the role of university staff in shaping student satisfaction. It suggests that staff should demonstrate a sincere concern for students through caring attitudes and supportive policies. This implies that a holistic approach to student well-being, encompassing both academic success and addressing personal challenges, is crucial. The notion of prioritizing students as the center of attention emphasizes the need for universities to proactively engage with students, understand their needs, and foster an environment where their concerns are genuinely valued.

### Target Audience
Our initial target audience will be Juniors and Seniors in college or university who have recently discovered a career path, or advanced education program that they would like to pursue but feel “late to the game”. Ideally, there will be a program put in place to bring everyone up to speed, so they understand what it takes to achieve their goals in college. Since these students most likely have focused on their academics primarily and college and thought that is all they need to generate success after college need to be brought to speed and be provided with an immediate network. Eventually, we will expand our target audience to every student no matter the age. Specifically, students studying in the School of Information Sciences, the Gies College of Business, the Grainger School of Engineering, and exclusive majors like Economics and Statistics in the School of Liberal Arts and Sciences. These majors are selected because they are the most likely to either end up working a corporate job or stay in school for a master's program. For example, the paper, Career Planning Courses Increase the Career Readiness of Graduate and Postdoctoral Trainees, conducted various studies in particular, “This study reports on the initial effort of two institutions to offer doctoral career development courses in the form of academic credit-bearing courses, each designed independently while sharing a common goal of supporting exploration of the many career opportunities that can be found outside of academia . . . Career management and planning activities involve: (a) job search skills such as informational interviewing, interview skills, and resume preparation, as well as (b) plans for acquiring the additional technical and human relation skills needed to successfully pursue their career and life goals. This framework is a variation from the traditional themes of "career awareness," “career exploration,” and “career preparation/career immersion” “(Layton). This quote is vital because it is detailing the initial efforts of two institutions to introduce doctoral career development courses, which are structured as credit-counting courses. These courses, though independently designed by each institution, share a common objective of facilitating the exploration of diverse career opportunities beyond academia. This plan focuses on integrating academic credit into career management and planning activities. Additionally, the institutions hope to give doctorate students an organized environment in which they may actively participate in skill-building activities in addition to exploring non-academic job opportunities. This method considers how doctorate candidates' careers are developing and fits in with the realities of gaining not only academic knowledge but also the interpersonal skill set required in a variety of professional fields.




### Strategy and Plan Outline
#### Initial Plan
Essentially the solution I am trying to create for my Open-Source Community is the possibility of providing students in the second half of their college career a network and resources to help their goals after their graduation. First, I want to advance the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign Career Center. As of now they are on an appointment-based system and are mainly used to schedule interviews with companies. I think resource has great potential to lead students to achieve their goals and attain any career or program they desire. First, they should create a curriculum teaching students how to create standout resumes, how they should proceed with networking, and most importantly, a general timeline for when their field be recruiting for when applications are due for any given master's program. This way, every student (or initially upperclassmen) has the refined skills, spotless resume, and network to achieve their goals. As of now, the career center has all of these resources mainly available but again, students need to seek it out and it is questionable how strong these resources are. One technological advancement that could be implemented is a database of resources. I imagine this to look like the following: having documents broken down by industry that provide interview help. An example of this is a casing textbook for prospective consultants or a handbook of terms for investment bankers. Another resource should be a behavioral guide or a coach that leads students to be able to present the best version of themselves in front of interviews. This will make UIUC students stand out compared to their competition, and they will be able to properly explain their college experience and extracurriculars and give in-depth examples of how the knowledge they acquired at the University of Illinois will translate into whatever job they are interviewing for. Also, by utilizing a tool like Airtable, the University could survey all alumni and this Airtable will have their job titles, majors, campus involvements, etc. and this could immediately connect students to alumni and make more meaningful connections within their network of alumni. This would enable all students to reach out to alumni and gain a better understanding of what any career path truly entails.

#### Advanced Plan
The Initial Plan is what can be done immediately since the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign most likely has all these resources at its disposal and it can implement these ideas quickly. However, I believe there is a way to make searching for a job, networking, and developing your career a more interactive experience. Everybody is aware of LinkedIn, but my solution is combining platforms like Airtable and Slack and enabling students to connect via these platforms. Instead of students having to reach out to alumni or other resources on their merit, the school could implement a platform that allows students to connect internally. From these connections students could discuss career trajectory, people they have talked or even interview help. Students would create a profile based on their major and career interests. From these students can make a decision to connect with others and put time on each other’s calendars strictly dedicated to interview or resume help. Not only will this benefit the university and students by getting more jobs and being more prepared than other universities during application and interview season. It will also turn the student population inward and instead of having a competitive nature in the classroom, students will be more inclined to give and receive help based on their strengths and weaknesses. By encouraging students to collaborate, they will be able to help each other by giving more honest and transparent feedback along with lifting the entire student population with them.

### Principles and Community
Special events that could be held for these students are live networking events. This is vital because by translating the skills they learned by reading and countless amount of Zoom meetings, they can put them to use in a real-life, in-person setting. Additionally, by hosting in-person events, they can utilize the Airtable mentioned earlier by having alumni who are in different parts of their careers come to speak and give students an idea of where they could be in a few years. This is especially important to demonstrate to students it's never too late to begin their journey to career growth. As for how the three main principles of Collaboration, Accessibility, and Mentorship must be applied, our Open-Source community must emphasize these exact principles. By deploying these three principles, students will be making sure they are available to help others, always give strong and honest feedback, along with connecting them with others to continue to collaborate. The paper, Examining the Impact of a University Mentorship Program on Student Outcomes, goes in-depth on a study it completed on student mentorship in college and found that “The results demonstrate that the mentees accrued several benefits from participating in the mentorship program. For mentees (but not the control group), job search self-efficacy increased over time because of participating in the program. Mentees valued receiving practical career-related support such as opportunities for networking, resume development, and job interviewing skills” (Hamilton). The quote highlights those mentees highly valued the practical career support they received through a mentorship program. This support included opportunities for networking, assistance with resume development, and the enhancement of job interviewing skills, proving that all students can benefit from a platform that was described earlier.

### Conclusion
To conclude, there should be platforms implemented in universities that help upperclassmen who are seeking a job or placement in a program of their choice after graduation. By first targeting upperclassmen we can test and implement changes that need to be made to our collaboration and mentorship platform and could then be deployed as a full-scale career resource center for university students of all ages. By collecting data and continuously improving the ability of the platform to support Collaboration, Accessibility, and Mentorship, we will transform the entire University of Illinois’s student population to be fully equipped to take on any interview, any master’s program, or any doctorate program. The concepts taught in IS 340: Project Management taught by Professor Alicea, have provided me with a landscape idea of how the creation of this platform could be achieved and how to continuously make improvements to the platform as more data is collected and we can properly make data-driven improvements to improve every University of Illinois’s student unstoppable in whatever endeavors they go for in their future after graduation. 

### Sources

Elliott, Kevin M. “Key Determinants of Student Satisfaction.” Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory & Practice, vol. 4, no. 3, Nov. 2002, pp. 271–279, https://doi.org/10.2190/b2v7-r91m-6wxr-kccr. 

Layton, Rebekah L., et al. “Career Planning Courses Increase Career Readiness of Graduate and Postdoctoral Trainees.” F1000Research, vol. 9, 3 Feb. 2022, p. 1230, https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.26025.2. 

Hamilton, Leah K. Hamilton. Et al. “Examining the Impact of a University Mentorship Program on Student Outcomes.” Https://Www.emerald.com/Insight/Content/Doi/10.1108/IJMCE-02-2018-0013/Full/Html, Emerald Publishing Limited, 30 Jan. 2019, www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/IJMCE-02-2018-0013/full/html. 


