## Building Gen-Z Election Engagement

William Bechtel, Fall 2024.


### Election Background  

[Comment_1]: <> (begin your text here)

It is no secret amongst Americans that, in general, Gen-Z have one of the lowest voter turnout percentages compared with the other generations. While this is a result of a significant number of social factors that can’t be controlled, there are also a few unnatural ways this comes to be. One that is rather straightforward, but not often considered, is TV advertising. Some newer methods of advertising include using platforms like Facebook and YouTube, but those ads are easily skipped. However, you can’t skip live TV. Therefore, political campaigns and other related campaign groups will spend a significant portion of their fundraising money on TV ad campaigns. Here’s the issue with that, Gen-Z don’t watch live TV nearly as much as other age demographics. According to a report on a Pew Research Institute survey from 2017, the 18-29 age group reported only 8% and 10% as receiving their news from network and cable TV, respectively. This compares to the 50-64 demographic who reported 35% for both, and the 65+ group reported 48% for network TV and 57% for cable (Matsa, 2018). This is an alarming difference and highlights just some of the inequality surrounding our elections.

#### Organization Overview

[Comment_9]: <> (begin your text here)

One way to help this is by building engagement at the grassroots, personal level. I aim to develop an open-source organization that will spread polls targeted to Gen-Z through social media and then create unique graphics formatted to be easily shared. This is a complex process and relies on building a robust community and creating the right kind of polls and graphics to share and intrigue others. Creating this type of open-source project and community can be focused to a few key areas. The first is to develop the project scope. Approaching the project scope, most elements would really hinge on some key steps, and programs, being completed by the founding group prior to any efforts to grow. Following that, we can begin building a user base and finding interested users. Some of them have useful skills and may want to get more involved, so a rough plan for managing the resources they can provide (time, skillset, etc.) will be beneficial. Once those two elements have been complete and there’s a growing userbase, it’ll be important to continue optimizing and adding new graphs and features. Thus, we’ll need to develop a version control and naming system that is consistent and will be able to handle lots of iterations. All these tasks would be essential to successfully growing the organization and its userbase, however this project follows a more unique timeframe. Presidential elections, which receive the highest turnout, are only every four years making timing critical. This project will not be easy, but with some patience and a solid foundation, it’s possible that this organization can become a legitimate source of polling data of younger voters leading up to the 2028 presidential election.

[Comment_2]: <> (An example of a reference in paper text, cite in Reference list -- see Comment 8)

#### The Founding Group
[Comment_3]: <> (begin your text here)

Before we can begin discussing details and intricacies, it’s important to determine the base level of people needed for this project to get started, because a team is needed before starting. Like any organization, and not specifically open source, you need a variety of assets in place, which requires varying skills, before ever growing. For our organization, that’ll mean I need some to recruit people for a few key positions that I can’t confidently, or practically, complete myself. The first person to recruit for is who we will refer to as our Lead Activist (LA). We would be looking for someone who not only has a fundamental interest in politics, but also someone that has a desire to promote a fair electoral process. They are possibly the most crucial person needed for this project as they are the final editor of any poll we publish. Some other responsibilities they would have include overseeing user base growth efforts and helping manage any social media accounts. The next person that is critical to launch is the Lead Developer (LD). This person will help me in managing commits to our GitHub but will be the one to program the framework of the repository and website. For this reason, they will need to have a background in HTML, JS, and PHP. All of which are languages I don’t have a background in. The last critical person to launch is myself. I will help write, with integration help from the LD, the initial programs that generate interactive graphs and figures that will be displayed on our website. Another task I will work with the LD on is the design and layout of the website. The last key responsibility of mine is to manage the critical GitHub pushes for major changes or poll updates. Beyond that, there will be several other roles that could be useful, but they can be filled at later periods. With the LD and LA on board, work can begin on building the foundation of the organization. One of our most important steps is also going to be a flexible one, developing our scope, a roadmap of goals we want to meet, and a timeline of when events and releases can occur during an election cycle.

[Comment_4]: <> (Insert Figure with caption here)

### Outlining Project Scope & Timeline     

[Comment_5]: <> (begin your text here)

A critical step that will first be taken is determining where, and who, we would like for our programs and website to be focused on. Our starting point is going to be the state of Illinois alone. What this will mean in practice is that the programs and website will be tailored to generate maps of all of Illinois broken, with some broken down by county. Ideally, we would write this in a way that can be expanded on later when we hopefully expand to more states and eventually the whole country before the 2028 election. While working on this outline, now is the time to acknowledge a critical value of our site. We will work in every effort to maintain complete neutrality in the content that we generate and publish. While everyone has their own political beliefs, it’s important that factual reporting does not get hindered by those beliefs or narratives that surround them. The next task for us is to create a rough outline of how we will manage updates, changes, or alterations to any of the polls or figures on the website during an election cycle. There are some key aspects of these decisions, which may change over time, I am confident on. One is our update policy during an election cycle, which for us will be from the December of the year until the day of the election. During this period, any changes made to the website or figure designs will only be pushed once a week, likely on Sundays so I know I can do them. One of the reasons for this is simplicity, but also uniformity. Humans inherently like habits, and if our user base can develop one where they know Sundays at 12 the polling data gets updated, I think that will help with our user engagement and growth. 

### Building & Managing Our User Base     

[Comment_5]: <> (begin your text here)

The most important aspect of this organization is the users we hope to poll; without them we can’t generate useful graphics and figures to share with voters. Building up a solid user base will undoubtedly take time but can be streamlined in a few ways. Before we can delve into this, we need to understand what we’ll be asking of our users, and what information we expect to receive. Instead of traditional polling, which is normally conducted via phone calls, our polling is going to be done via web form. This will be better suited to capture a random userbase and allow for rapid growth and larger polls. As such, we will have users create a login upon first completing a poll as a mandatory step. This will likely be a traditional email and password format, with the potential growth into an MFA style if we had enough anonymized data to monetize. There are a few reasons for using an email. One is that it’s a method of identification for us to help verify all our poll results. Another reason is for our user retention. We will utilize a mechanism we’ll call the Follow-up-Poll (FP). 
Running it through to this point, a first-time user would have seen one of our graphics or a link to our poll, and they’ll then fill out that specific poll’s questions or go to a different poll to fill out. Once complete, they are prompted that results aren’t counted until they provide an email and, maybe, password for future use. The password depends on the exact method of verification we use for individuals. Once they enter their email and password, they are informed that if they would like to answer the same poll in the future (if their mind changes or to simply reaffirm their position), the easiest method will be to go through a custom link that we send in our FP email. Our polling data and new graphics will go on a single timescale, week to week. We also are defining our weeks as Sunday at 12AM to Saturday at 11:59PM EST. This is for uniformity and to provide me time to create the graphics that will be updated across the website. The timing of the web update is a key aspect of this organization’s success. I have absolutely zero data to support my theory, but here it is. Younger generations at this point are used to constantly refreshing their social media/news/streams/etc. to see updated and live content, that some of the glory and surprise of seeing an update is lost when you looked a mere hour ago. That is why our graphics and aggregated polling data updates will have a consistent day and time of the week they get pushed live. My theory is that if we chose a time in a weekday, no matter which one (Monday-Friday), our platform would likely see a more mediocre response, as people work different shifts, schedules, and use their phones at different times. That’s why a weekend day would be more ideal, and given the nature of our organization, an election polling website (yay…?), Sunday feels more appropriate, and since we want as much engagement as possible, the earlier in the day the better. 
That is why I landed on 12PM EST every Sunday as the time of the week our published page gets updated. This is because what will follow is how we retain users. One of the best slogans to use in an email subject is “Follow-Up” because most people immediately equate that to something they’ve participated or been involved with, as opposed to an advertisement or other spam email. Our email subject will also include some relevant information related to which poll we’re following up on. The body will first have an obvious and large link stating something like “LINK TO FOLLOW UP POLL”. This custom link will promptly direct them to another poll which has their email prefilled. This is so we can then easily attribute that user in future anonymized trend analysis. The email will then include a short pollsters note, aka a note from me about anything of interest that happened that week in relation to the organization. Depending on size limitations, I may not include the actual updated graphics in the FP email, however I will likely send a link to the most important graphic from the poll they filled out, which will usually be the presidential race broken down at the county level. That will be it for the email content and it will be sent out automatically Sundays at midnight Eastern time. We want persistence and continuous engagement, but we don’t want to be overbearing. This raps up the premise of how our webpage will interact with users, and how we will then communicate back. To grow that userbase up though, we will rely on our LA and myself, and our use of social media. Initially, it will start with us spamming our personal accounts with Instagram posts and stories as well as Snapchat. The LA will also manage an account for the group which will also be posting regularly and will continuously follow as many people as possible to grow an audience and get eyes on our name and content. As this group grows, the LA will hopefully recruit some others who are willing to assist in this campaign, and the LA can provide a broader, more managerial oversite of the SM campaign. At that point, our content will begin speaking for itself and activist users will start plugging our content, by themselves, across their own accounts as the election gets closer. If we get to the point where we have one person who’s either random, or a friend of a friend, post/advertise/promote our page, this organization would be a success in my eyes. But that success will only last but a moment, as new challenges will await.

### Developing Version Control & Naming Schemes    

[Comment_5]: <> (begin your text here)

One of our biggest challenges as we grow and have more users contributing will be standardization. While our specific lines of code and exact phrases may vary, some level of uniformity needs to be in place for future success to flow. That’s why before we go live for the first time, ideally Summer 2024, at least a rough draft of our naming convention needs to be established for ourselves. We will likely need to go in and finalize it once we have more than just ourselves contributing, but that’s one of those new challenges I talked about that we will tackle later. For our rough draft, we’ll need to cover the bases on the different types of documents, programs, and other content we create, and the possible versions of that. However, when it comes to the versions, we will use GitHub to help as our version control system, which will make it a bit easier. Regarding other types of content, we’ll have a number of programs that are designed to output various graphics. Theoretically, our page could end up posting 52 graphics each week (one for each state by county and two national ones by state and county), so having easily distinguishable names for our own record keeping will be important. For reference, if we were fully operational nationally for the entire 2028 cycle, just counting static graphics alone, we would get over 2500+ images for the graphics as described above. That’s why even within programs we write, and any future ones created to generate immensely interactive graphics or other various things, the method we use to name outputs is crucial. Our organization is going to go with a rather straightforward style. Any graphic, static or otherwise, will follow this naming convention: 
“[Date]_[Location]_[Poll Name]_[Graphic Type].[File Type]”
Where the bracketed variables are restricted to specific conventions and vocabularies. While some will be unique methods, this style will allow for easy access and organization in the future. The variables follow these specifications:
[Date] will be formatted using the date when data was last collected (not uploaded). Follow YYYYMMDD as this will become easy to read given time. It will make it easier to focus into a certain period if you are looking through a folder of hundreds of images with similar names. i.e. in 2028 if we want to find data from 2026 it’s the first thing, then the month, then day.
[Location] Will be a combination of unique naming scheme and standard as well. For the various national level graphics, they will be title “Nat-[focus]” with the focus being either county, “Nat-Cty”, or state, “Nat-Sta”. This also allows us to add other types of national charts, like electoral vote scaled maps, without confusing the naming. Then any state map will be named using it’s uppercase two letter abbreviation. For now, I only intend on simple state maps being available with boundaries at the county level, but we’ll still include the focus onto it. So, for now we’ll only ever see, for example “…_IL-Cty_...”, but this allows for flexibility in the future should we identify new boundaries we can set.
[Poll Name] will simply refer to a master document in which we will have a key linking a specific Poll Name to that poll’s questions/documentation. They will mostly just be “Federal-General” which would refer to it being about Federal seats of government and asking about all relevant candidates. Other future examples could include things like “Federal-BigIssue” which may be related to a poll done asking people to rank the 3 biggest issues at the national level from a list. Again, this is something that would be down the road, but we should think about and account for now. 
[Graphic Type] is exactly what it sounds like. It is just the simplest way of describing what kind of graphic it is. This will mostly just be “map-cty” for a map that has its smallest boundaries at the county level. Again, this is going to be the most common graphic we produce, and only for the start. However, that will change, and thus we need to account for that in our naming scheme. 
[File Type] is the simplest. Might be a .PNG or .JSON, or who knows what, but it should be included in every graphic name.
That does it for us though. With our basic schemas and organization in place, the LD, LA and I can get rolling. Having these foundational pillars that are driven deep will let us easily expand both upward and outward, without the weight of too much documentation building up on us. This is critical, because issues of improper naming or accidentally reversing a name format will always be noticed from the start, and no reorganization or reformatting will need to be done later when our systems are much more complex.

### Conclusion      

[Comment_7]: <> (begin your text here)

With our conventions documented, the LA and LD on board, and our programs and website staged, we are ready for launch. Once live, I have no intention of this site coming down. In the off years between elections the closest group of activists and developers will continue with periodic work to improve systems and optimize/beautify our current programs and the graphics we create. Once we begin an election cycle, I would ideally like no changes to be made to the programs that create graphics, barring those to fix errors or bugs. This goes back to the uniformity and consistency that will help us establish our own type of branding each year. If someone were to pull the weekly national charts after an election cycle, I would expect 52 charts formatted and styled the same way. Implementing changes throughout an election cycle will cause confusion and could provide ambiguity to users who may have specific expectations. As we grow though, our goals, expectations, and ambitions will shift with the times, but for now, we have a plan.
In other parts of the world, people would be blessed with the opportunity to vote for their elected leaders. Yet as I’ve grown older, I realize many of my peers and other younger people don’t fully understand how truly impactful voting can be at scale. Recently, I’ve disliked having live and virtual conversations with strangers and even loose acquaintances about politics, and reserve my conversations mostly with those who I know can carry a meaningful conversation about the issues and facts. However, this slight disdain for politics is not me becoming less interested, but rather shifting the aspect of government I find important. I, and many others, dislike seeing constant political messaging designed to persuade me in one direction, whether I agree or not. The shift I’ve had is in spreading messages to vote. The Get Out To Vote organization (getouttovote.org, 2023) is a prime example of messaging that everyone, regardless of political position, should be behind. By limiting this organization to a neutral party and messaging, it allows for our growth to be far less likely to face or see backlash and gives a better chance to grow. I think that so long as Americans have free and fair elections, our Republic will survive. Ensuring that people stayed tuned in and keep updated with unbiased information during election years is extremely important to that. This organization isn’t trying to revolutionize polling, our goal is to form new ways to reach representative young voting demographics in the scale and ways that traditional polling via phone can’t provide. There’s a steep hill to climb, but with determination this organization can become a reality and become a legitimate data source for pollsters and news outlets across the country.

### References     

[Comment_8]: <> (begin your reference list here. Cite as author, year in main text. Reference link should correpond with link in Comment 2  Use any format you wish -- MLA, APA, etc.)

Cite as the getouttovote.org. Get Out To Vote. n.d. Website. 10 12 2023. <https://getouttovote.org/>.
Matsa, Katerina Eva. Fewer Americans rely on TV news; what type they watch varies by who they are. 5 January 2018. <https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2018/01/05/fewer-americans-rely-on-tv-news-what-type-they-watch-varies-by-who-they-are/#:~:text=There%20is%20a%20strong%20relationship%20between%20age%20and,compared%20with%2049%25%20of%20those%2065%20and%20older.>.
