## Open Source Real estate approach
Sharon Victor, Fall 2023

### Abstract
Throughout this paper, I will talk about the purpose behind this idea, the features that will be included in the website, the target audience this is meant to reach, the strategy in which I plan on executing this idea, some of the key principles that this idea would cover which was also covered in lecture, and a useful open source license that I plan on using. 

### Introduction
Traditional real estate websites and real estate methods primarily focus on selling the house and just the house. Whether it is a real estate agent that assists you or a website like Redfin or Zillow, a buyer would know a lot about the house features, the year it was built, the price, the price estimation in a couple of years, and a couple of other factors about the house that the buyer want to know before buying it. But when a person actually buys a house, there are a lot more factors about the community that they should have considered that they might not have thought about like the community feel, community events, noise levels in the community, age group of everyone in the community, traffic within the community, and many other factors that they might still be blind to. The problem with the current existing platforms for Real Estate which is either through an agent or through websites like Redfin and Zillow is that you can’t get an accurate feel of what it feels like to live in this house with the rest of the community. People usually only consider certain aspects while buying a home which is price and other factors relating specific to the house. I think that introducing an open source real estate project that could fill this gap could be a good project to take up. In this project, there is a website like Redfin or Zillow, where buyers can browse through the different houses on the market while also getting real feedback from  people who live in the community itself. These people who live in the community can provide real updates on how it feels like to live in the community, or how noisy it gets in the community and which neighbor possibly is the noisiest, or updating the buyer on the community events that happens regularly, or everyone in the community can update their age so that the buyers can see what type of age groups live in the area, or house owners within the community can also update the buyers on the traffic level surrounding the community. Since this idea is open source, more factors can always be added on as features into this website. I think there should be a separate chat on the website where house owners and house buyers can communicate about different factors they want to consider aside from the house itself and share some useful information that could help make the house buyer and informed real estate decision. 

### Purpose
The purpose of this website is to enhance the real estate experience by adding another feature to consider for the buyers which is the community aspect of the house. Community involvement can enhance the way of living by a lot. Home buyers usually don't consider this while buying the house but after they have bought and settled in, they start to think about the people surrounding them and how to become friends with them. Let's say a couple that is looking to retire buys a new house in this community and after they bought a house realizes that the community is filled with little kids and teenagers and hence the noise levels in the community are through the roof. This couple might have found a good house which they have bought through the recommendations of either an agent or because they looked at a website and saw this house and fell in love with it, but they might not have realized that the neighborhood and the community is not what they would have expected for a retirement house. This couple would probably want to be surrounded by people their own age who are also retiring instead of little kids that make a lot of noise. This was one example of why it is important for home buyers to also consider the community instead of just the house. Another example could be the opposite case where a young family with little kids moves into a house but soon realizes that the neighborhood  is filled with people that are much older than them which essentially is not what they expected. Little kids would want to be surrounded by other kids their own age so that they can have someone to play with. The parents of their kids would also want to be surrounded by people their own age so that they can relate their problems too. Home buying is not just about how well the house suits the buyer, but also how well the community fits into the buyer's needs. This need is often not talked about and hence not considered as a factor while purchasing the house.
Home buyers need to have a holistic view of the neighborhood before purchasing a house which is exactly where my website idea comes into place. With this website, buyers will have real feedback about the community from the community members before they make a decision on a real estate property. 

### Features
In this website, I am planning on making the UI/UX very user friendly which makes it easier to use. My vision for this website is a website that is similar to Redfin or Zillow but with an extra feature which is the community feature. I want there to be two separate areas in the website where this feature is included. The first area is as a filter that the buyers can filter their houses through and the second area is more of a chat room where you get real feedback and you can chat with real house owners in the community. There are some features that I have thought about for this website already that will be implemented in the first phase of this project. There can be more features that can be added on to this project as we get real feedback from the website users. The features that will be added in phase 1 include: 

#### Interactive Map
The interactive map is just like the map found on Redfin or Zillow where users get a display of an area that they have selected with all of the prices associated with the houses/ properties in that area. But one feature that I want additional in my idea of this website compared to Redfin is a map with some of the other filters included like noise levels, age groups, traffic, etc. I plan on having a key with some colors and mentioning how a lighter color would for example mean it is a community with a lesser noise level compared to a darker color which would mean it has a higher noise level. And this key can apply to any filter like noise level or age group or traffic. 

#### Noise Levels
This feature is pretty straightforward. The community residents input the noise level on a scale from 1 through 10 depending on their experience and this input will be taken in and gets associated with a lighter or darker color depending on the number (lightest being 1 and darkest being 10) and then can be applied as a filter on the map/ property lookups.

#### Age Groups
This feature is to inform buyers about the age group of the residents that already live in the community. The residents just need to input the age of themselves and their dependents, if any. Now this gets taken in and sorted into different groups (ages 1-10, 11-18, 19-25, 26-35, 36-45, 46-60, 60+).This information also gets added as different colors for the key/legend (lighter colors and younger and darker colors and older).This filter can also be applied on the map or for property lookups. 

#### Traffic and Parking
If buyers want to make sure there's not a lot of traffic and ensure a lot of parking surrounding their house, this feature helps monitor the traffic levels on an average day and this information is also inputted by the community residents. The residents would have to input a number from 1 through 10 based on how heavy the traffic is and the availability of parking surrounding their community(1 being least traffic and 10 being most traffic and 1 being no availability for parking and 10 being a lot of available spots for parking). Based on the number that the residents input, the color on the scale would vary on the map if the traffic and parking filter is turned on.

#### Renovation
A lot of home buyers, soon after their purchase, often get inspired for their new house and want to renovate their house according to their vision. And quite a lot of Renovations that home buyers do right after purchasing the house are usually the same renovations. I thought it would be useful for a chat where other home buyers in the same community who have probably already looked into the same or similar renovations could share all the information about the local rates, who to contact, and how to approach the project because they have already looked into it and it would save a lot of time and effort for the home buyers as well. This feature will not exist on the map but instead in the chat room area of the website. 

#### Community Events
A good bonding activity for people in certain communities is our community events organized by certain people in the community. Home buyers can benefit from these community events to socialize and Branch out their friend group through these community events. This is another chat room feature where community residents can talk about the upcoming events surrounding their community where everyone can go and bond, potentially making more friends which makes a house feel like a home. This feature can almost be thought of as a group chat on messages with just the community residents so that new house buyers don't have to awkwardly stand at a random house looking to make friends. 

### Audience
The audience that would benefit the most from this website idea are potential home buyers who want to seek a comprehensive understanding of the neighborhood before purchasing a house. Home or property buyers would benefit the most but this website idea might also help sellers who are trying to sell their house especially if a potential home buyer is more interested in the community than the house itself. If the seller has a nice enough community, that might be enough to sell the house. This idea could also help real estate agents who are looking for specific houses on the market to sell to their customers. The audience that can contribute to adding on to the data that needs to be collected also needs a restriction on who can contribute to the website. The restriction is that a contributor needs to be a community resident and above the age of 21. 

### Strategy and Technologies
To successfully implement this open source real estate project idea, I need a strategy that is focused on data collection and involves the newest technology on the market currently. Initially the project would include developing a user-friendly website that will allow the community members to easily input the data regarding the noise levels, age groups and demographics, traffic and parking information, and local events. This website should emphasize strongly on simple user experience so that it is easy for contributors from diverse backgrounds to add on to the website. I think that there should also be a verification system to ensure accuracy and reliability of the data that is collected from the residents. There should be automated checks that make sure the contributors are not robots. I want to code in Visual Studio code and since it is a website, I will probably be coding it in HTML and CSS with JavaScript for the back end. This code will be regularly pushed to GitHub for the entire team to see. Documentation and work tickets will be on Confluence and Jira respectively. For the team meetings and chats, we will utilize Slack. 
Outside of a technical perspective, from a marketing perspective, a key part of the strategy involves community outreach to partnerships with local organizations like real estate agencies and community leaders to encourage participation in this website and build trust for the website as well. In order to stay relevant in the current societal competitions in this market, there needs to be regular updates and Improvement to the platform incorporating user feedback and any new technological advancements. Additionally, having a comprehensive marketing campaign highlighting the unique proposition that my platform brings to the market would be useful in attracting initial users and gaining momentum. 
Overall, this strategy uses a balance of technological sophistication and community involvement by gathering data through them which will help my idea of real estate providing a more holistic view of communities for property buyers.

### Community
#### Community engagement
Community engagement is a key principle in this open source real estate project. This website allows local residents to actively contribute information about their neighborhoods to help home buyers make a fully informed decision. To encourage participation, this website will have a user-friendly UI that makes it easier for Community residents to share and contribute to the database of the neighborhood insights. These insights are then taken and published to help home buyers and the community as well because of the amount of improvement that this data will cause.

#### Continuous improvement
Continuous Improvement is very important in this project because the platform should evolve in response to the user feedback and the changing community needs. What needs to be changed can be gathered through the user interactions and the feedback sessions in the chat room and the community forums. This is a very important principle because it ensures the platform remains relevant and makes sure it meets the requirements of both the real estate market and the community members. 

#### Accountability
In order to keep the data accuracy high and maintain trust, the website will have a proper verification system to make sure the information on the website is accurate. I also think in order to maintain accountability, transparency is very important. This project will maintain transparency about what it is doing with the data that the user inputs throughout the process. 

### License
For this project, the MIT license seems to be the best fit because of its simplicity and permissiveness. This license is well suited for a community driven project because it allows users freedom in terms of usage and modification. This license is also straightforward and easy to understand.This would encourage participation from individuals and organizations and make them input almost any idea they want to the project. The MIT license also provides a level of legal protection for contributors against liability which is important for this project that heavily relies on community contributions. 

### Conclusion
In summary, the proposed open source real estate project focuses on community aspects along with some traditional real estate features and this will offer a more holistic view of what it means to buy a property. This project makes sure that a home buyer not just finds a house but instead finds a home in a community that fits the buyer's lifestyle and expectations. The website's user-friendly interface and the interactive map with all the features mentioned above are designed to help buyers with comprehensive neighborhood insights. The real-time feedback and interaction between the current residents and potential buyers helps Foster a sense of community engagement ensuring that home buyers are well informed about their potential neighborhoods. The strategy for implementing this project involves several new technologies and marketing techniques to help gain momentum. The MIT license also aligns with the project's needs perfectly. This project, although it's just slightly different from a traditional Real Estate website like Redfin or Zillow, addresses a critical Gap in the market by integrating the community aspect into the home buying process. This project that has some initial features will be evolving constantly based on user feedback which will help the real estate market and home buyers finding homes and communities catering to their needs. 

### References
- "The MIT License | Open Source Initiative." Open Source Initiative, opensource.org/license/mit/.

- "What Is Steering in Real Estate? Is It Illegal? - HomeLight." HomeLight Blog, HomeLight, www.homelight.com/blog/buyer-what-is-steering-in-real-estate/.

- Paciorek, Jeffrey. "The Ultimate Guide to Web Design: HTML, CSS, & JavaScript." HubSpot Blog, HubSpot, 4 Mar. 2021, blog.hubspot.com/marketing/web-design-html-css-javascript.

- "Compare Knowledge Management Software | Capterra." Capterra, www.capterra.com/sem-compare/knowledge-management-software/?utm_source=ps-google&utm_medium=ppc&utm_campaign=:1:CAP:2:COM:3:All:4:US:5:BAU:6:SOF:7:Desktop:8:BR:9:Knowledge_Management&network=g&gclid=CjwKCAiAg9urBhB_EiwAgw88mcDuM64mQy-AldLleC6noB5oUeSUyI_cARTTZHbAJ91TfA5yYF941hoCfsoQAvD_BwE.
- "Open Source Licenses." Snyk, Snyk Ltd., snyk.io/learn/open-source-licenses/.


