## Improving Healthcare Services on College Campuses
Zoe Matz, Fall 2023

### Abstract

[Comment_1]: <> This paper seeks to offer insight into the open-source community I have envisioned. The intention of sharing this community that I have conceptualized but does not currently exist is to express what has been learned during my Project Management course this semester. Community development and collaboration are two key themes in our open-source community, as we are focusing on healthcare services and the well-being of all members of the college campus community. The field of healthcare today faces many issues and challenges, and not all healthcare organizations are keeping up to date with the latest technology. There are paperwork hassles, technology issues, etc. We want all members of the college campus community to receive quality healthcare and face minimal challenges, if any. This paper will link what we have learned in this course about open-source communities and how we will be using that knowledge for a real-world scenario. We hope for ideas, experiences, and skills to be shared. The principles of the project will be discussed, along with our purpose, target audience, strategy, and events for our open-source community. 

### Introduction   

[Comment_2]: <> Open-source software is seen as a big community project for technology. Unlike regular software, it is available for anyone to use and change. People from different backgrounds can work together to make it better, and because of this, it is not simply about the code. Rather, it is about sharing ideas and making technology accessible to everyone. Open-source software has had a big impact on how we use technology today, helping run many important things and giving power to users all over the world. According to opensource.com “The term open source refers to something people can modify and share because its design is publicly accessible.” And according to synopsys.com “Open source software (OSS) is software that is distributed with its source code, making it available for use, modification, and distribution with its original rights.” Regular computer users don’t typically see source code, it is the instructions that programmers use to make a program work. Examples of open-source communities include WordPress, The Linux Foundation, and the Apache Software Foundation. WordPress is a popular tool for creating websites that anyone can check out and use its code to make it better. As more people use it, more eyes can identify and address bugs and security issues. This community works together to improve WordPress by adding themes, plugins, and updates. Whether it’s individuals modifying their sites or experts developing completely new features, the WordPress community is all about sharing and collaboration. Moving onto The Linux Foundation, a prime example of an open-source community founded in 2000. This non-profit organization is dedicated to promoting the development of Linux and various open-source software projects. The operating system is open for anyone to access, modify, and share. And because of the collective effort, Linux remains a strong and dependable platform. Lastly, the Apache Software Foundation is another non-profit organization focused on supporting the development of open-source software projects. They use a license that allows developers to freely use and share the software but not sell it as a proprietary product. Individuals become members by actively helping with projects within this flexible and inclusive organization. Open-source software has many benefits in comparison to closed-source alternatives, both for independent developers and companies as a whole. Developers can kick-start projects without any upfront costs. In addition, individuals can code solutions and share issues with a supportive community. Further advantages include collaborating with other developers and scalability options, just to name a few. As for larger companies, they benefit from cost savings, enhanced adaptability, the speed and flexibility of open-source tools and resources, and valuable collaboration opportunities. 

#### Purpose
[Comment_3]: <> The purpose of my project is to improve and expand upon the healthcare services currently being offered on college campuses. We will be crafting a platform that focuses on three principles within this project: accessibility, privacy & security, and user-centered design. The goal of accessibility is to ensure that healthcare resources are not only available but easily accessible to all members of the campus community, including students, parents, faculty, and staff. A key aspect of my approach is a forefront focus on inclusivity, acknowledging and embracing the diverse range of abilities and needs among users. By recognizing and understanding these differences, the goal is to create healthcare solutions that cater to everyone, regardless of background or abilities. Commitment to accessibility also means prioritizing the accommodation of individuals with disabilities. This means that everyone can navigate and utilize these tools effectively. To achieve these objectives, the open-source community encourages user feedback, especially from those with diverse needs. This iterative feedback loop helps identify and address accessibility challenges, allowing for improvements to be made and all needs to be met. Accessibility is a core value of this open-source healthcare community, ensuring that all members of the college campus community can access and benefit from the services offered. Moving forward, privacy and security are foundational principles for this open-source healthcare community. The goals are to keep personal health information secure and establish measures to protect user privacy. The plan is to use advanced technologies to make sure that personal health information and data are safe. This includes encryption protocols, secure locations to store data, and rules in place about who can access the information. Within this open-source community, there will also be an open data unit established with clear protocols for handling personal data. Because of this, there will be trust built among users regarding the way data is collected, stored, and used. Another key aspect of privacy & security within this community is adhering to legal and regulatory requirements within the United States. This includes staying informed on healthcare data regulations and ensuring that practices align with the standards in place. In turn, this will create a culture of ethical data management. Regular security audits are also a main part of the approach, so routine assessments will be conducted and community members will be encouraged to participate in identifying and reporting any potential threats or vulnerabilities. By implementing the security measures discussed, adhering to legal requirements, and allowing for feedback, users will be able to trust this community for the protection of their health information. The last major principle will be user-centered design. Making things easy and enjoyable for users is the overall objective. The people using these healthcare services are at the forefront of this process. Conducting user research will help us better understand the needs and challenges that those on college campuses face with healthcare services they have previously interacted with. With this, continuous improvement will be essential, as designs are made and feedback consistently comes in. Things can be tweaked based on what the members of college campuses are looking for, resulting in a system that is easy to use and does exactly what everyone needs it to do. With user-centered design, the overall focus is creating an experience that is the best it can be. These three key principles, accessibility, privacy & security, and user-centered design, will allow this open-source healthcare community to flourish on college campuses and leave users with a platform that they feel safe, comfortable, and welcome to use. 

#### Target Audience     

[Comment_4]: <> The ideal target audience for this open-source community includes college students, faculty, staff, and parents associated with the campus community. By incorporating a diverse range of users, the goal is to create healthcare solutions that cater to the needs and preferences of everyone involved in the college experience and process. This is the ideal target audience for multiple different reasons. Students represent the primary users of improved healthcare services on campus and understanding their needs is essential for creating effective solutions. Faculty and staff, also integral parts of the academic space, will contribute perspectives to better the overall community. Encompassing parents into this target audience acknowledges their role in the well-being of students and allows for a more inclusive healthcare approach. Additionally, the open-source community welcomes participation from healthcare professionals, developers, and any other individuals passionate about improving college campus healthcare services. This ensures that the healthcare solutions developed are not only user-friendly and accessible but also benefit from the knowledge of professionals who care about the well-being of the college community. Healthcare professionals and developers typically have prior experience with other healthcare service platforms and can bring valuable expertise in this topic. They have important insight into what patients are looking for in terms of bettering these systems, as well as what is most convenient to use behind the scenes. They are essential to the ongoing innovation of the open-source community. This will allow for an effective solution for both patients and healthcare providers. This collaborative approach ensures that healthcare services are modified to the specific needs of the college community and promotes shared responsibility in improving the overall health and well-being of college campuses. 

#### Strategy
[Comment_5]: <> Our overall strategy for this open-source community is to address healthcare challenges faced by members of college campuses with the creation of an innovative open-source platform. The centralized and accessible platform will be used for health-related information and services. No private healthcare information will be shared on the open-source community. Private healthcare information will be stored in an environment with restricted access. The focus is on creating a hub where students can access relevant health information, schedule appointments with healthcare providers, and learn more about new campus health initiatives. The platform may be integrated with existing college campus healthcare systems. This platform will include code in different programming languages, mainly Python. Python was the first coding language I ever learned, and I feel that it is simpler to read and understand in comparison to other coding languages, so even those new to programming can contribute to our project. Python also encourages collaboration and sharing of code, both important elements of an open-source community. The platform encourages collaboration, allowing individuals within our target audience to contribute to its evolution. Moving further, our technical discussions typically focus on data security, integration with existing healthcare systems, user-centered design, and advancing the performance of current solutions. To make our code open-source, we will be sharing it on GitHub, granting anyone access to view and download it. The ability to modify the main repository in Git will be restricted. Monitoring the commitment of community members will be extremely important, and we will utilize project management tools, such as Jira to track ongoing tasks and assignments. We also hope to reward contributors for their efforts, and in turn, encourage ongoing commitment. In our community, we are committed to openness for our project. We will not only share the versions we release but also explain why we make the decisions that we do. Our biggest concern is code being stolen and copied, so we will have a team that focuses on keeping our project and users safe by staying updated on the latest security measures. 

#### Community
[Comment_6]: <> The involvement and contribution of our community is the most important part of our project, as this wouldn’t exist or be available otherwise. For this reason, we will hold weekly meetings for our members. The main focus of these meetings will be to provide updates on project milestones and address any challenges within the community. Some important points of discussion include the current challenges of campus healthcare services, feedback from the college campus community, collaboration with other open-source projects, concerns related to data security and privacy, and the outline of the future roadmap. These meetings will be held in person but will be recorded if members cannot attend. Aside from this, it is also essential for us to encourage engagement and celebrate what has already been accomplished. Our goal is to hold monthly special events, in addition to the weekly meetings. Some ideas for our special events include speakers, release parties, workshops, and mentorship programs. Our speaker series will feature industry experts, who will speak on a variety of topics, ranging from new technologies to best practices in the open-source community. Community members will better understand emerging trends and innovative solutions through the individuals we bring in. The goal is to leave members with useful takeaways for their engagement in the open-source community. The release parties will be an amazing way to celebrate the launch of a new version of our open-source code. Of course, the celebration portion is very exciting, but we also want members to ask questions about the latest version released so that concerns can be clarified and knowledge can be spread. We also plan to host live demonstrations on the newly released version for community members to witness how the new version functions firsthand. Through this, members will have the ability to ask questions on the latest version, as well as understand demos with other community members. An interactive and informative event is what we hope to spread through our release parties. Next, we will host workshops to allow participants to better understand specific topics and enhance their skills. For those who may be new to our community or lack experience in specific areas, these workshops will be incredible learning opportunities. Our members are all different, so these sessions will be essential for non-experienced community members to get the knowledge they need to move forward. Workshops will allow for much more meaningful contributions to our open-source projects in the long run. Lastly, our special events will encompass mentorship programs, where we will connect experienced community members with those who may be looking for some more guidance. This will allow for more personalized and relatable opportunities so that all members feel a sense of community and belonging. All of the events discussed, including weekly meetings and special events, are put in place for community members to collaborate, learn, and enhance their skills. 

### Conclusion      

[Comment_7]: <> In conclusion, this project highlights our open-source community, aiming to expand and improve healthcare services on college campuses by creating a platform where students can access relevant health information, schedule appointments with healthcare providers, and learn more about new campus health initiatives. We hope to provide services that not everyone may be aware of and help people through the system of healthcare. We first focused on three main principles including accessibility, privacy & security, and user-centered design. As mentioned, we will be using Python as the primary coding language for our platform, and the code will be shared through GitHub. However, modification access to the main repository in Git will be restricted. The target audience of college students, faculty, staff, parents, healthcare professionals, and developers allows for a diverse and inclusive overall community. Our main commitment is being open with our members and this will be reiterated at weekly meetings and special events. All members are encouraged to attend events so that they are up to date on project milestones and can grow relationships with other members. Through this project, we hope to expand and improve upon the current healthcare services being offered. Challenges for our target audience may include how one makes an appointment, not being aware of services that are provided, not understanding the system of healthcare altogether, or systems not being accessible. These are just a few of the many challenges that individuals may face within the healthcare service system. Healthcare services aren’t always easy to navigate, and like many students, I have encountered numerous challenges with the healthcare services provided on my campus. However, we are creating this open-source community to revolutionize this experience and encourage change in the healthcare space for students everywhere. 


### References     

[Comment_8]: <> J. West and S. O'Mahony, "Contrasting Community Building in Sponsored and Community 
Founded Open Source Projects," Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island, HI, USA, 2005, pp. 196c-196c, doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2005.166.

O’Mahony, S. The governance of open source initiatives: what does it mean to be 
community managed?. J Manage Governance 11, 139–150 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10997-007-9024-7

Opensource.com. (n.d.). What is open source? 
https://opensource.com/resources/what-open-source 

Research, R. P. I., Padhye, R., Research, I., Research, S. M. I., Mani, S., Research, V. S. S. I., 
Sinha, V. S., Davis, U. of C. at, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Klagenfurt, U. of, & Metrics, O. M. A. (2014, May 1). A study of external community contribution to open-source projects on github: Proceedings of the 11th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories. ACM Conferences. https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2597073.2597113 

What is open source software and how does it work?. Synopsys. (n.d.). 
https://www.synopsys.com/glossary/what-is-open-source-software.html 

